---
layout: post
title: 'My Sketchnotes and Thoughts from BaconBizConf 2013'
date: 2013-06-06
comments: true
---

It is hard to explain how excited I was when Amy announced
[BaconBizConf](https://unicornfree.com/category/baconbiz) in April of 2013. A
small conference devoted to like-minded people that either are, or want to be,
bootstrapping product businesses. The speaker lineup included personal "gurus"
that I look up to and listen to closely like Brennan Dunn and Patrick McKenzie.
Sold again.

It was a great conference, and I sketchnoted the entire thing. I wanted to share
my notes with you here, and talk about what I absorbed from these talks.

## Day 1

![Nathan Barry](/images/bacon/bacon_biz_2013-1.jpg)

Nathan Barry has had a really good year. He's released several infoproducts
including [The App Design
Handbook](https://nathanbarry.com/app-design-handbook/), [Designing Web
Applications](https://nathanbarry.com/webapps/), and most recently
[Authority](https://nathanbarry.com/authority/) which is about... self publishing
infoproducts. Additionally he's launched his first SAAS product with
[ConvertKit](https://convertkit.com?lmref=ia534A). This dude is **busy**. He's also made
**$200k** in the last 9 months across these products.

Wow.

![Nathan Barry](/images/bacon/bacon_biz_2013-2.jpg)

My key take-aways from Nathan's talk were:

- Teach everything you know. Even if you are learning yourself, teach it.
- Tiered offerings are huge revenue boosters.
- Patio11 says **charge more**
- Be consistent. Write every day as a **habit**

He's an inspiring guy, and his products are of the highest quality.

![Marc-Andre Cournoyer](/images/bacon/bacon_biz_2013-3.jpg)

Next up was Marc-Andre Cournoyer who wrote [Create Your Own Programming
Language](https://createyourproglang.com/). Marc really hammered home the need to
actively seek out and **kill** objections your potential customers might have.
He pointed out that **social proof** is absolutely essential when you are trying
to sell a product, and that anchoring prices against much higher prices is
extremely effective.

![Brennan Dunn](/images/bacon/bacon_biz_2013-4.jpg)

Brennan Dunn gave a talk on making money via an email newsletter. Email is "old
school", which means it is tried and true platform for reaching your potential
customers. Education based marketing is highly effective, and we are delivering
constant value to our audiences inbox on a regular basis. By "giving away" our
most valuable content, we are priming the audience for future product offerings.

I can say from first hand experience that this works. I've bought Brennan's
books, and even took his [Consultancy
Masterclass](https://doubleyourfreelancingrate.com/build-a-consultancy).

![Patrick, Nathan, Marc, and Amy](/images/bacon/bacon_biz_2013-5.jpg)

This was a panel on infoproducts. Tiers. Email lists. Charging more.

There was a definite theme.

![Chris & Natalie Nagele](/images/bacon/bacon_biz_2013-6.jpg)

Chris and Natalie from [Wildbit Software](https://wildbit.com/) are the creators
of Beanstalk. They started out with a 100% remote development team, and have
been migrating to an onsite structure after 10 years of doing remote.

At first I though, "meh, working at home is awesome", but then they got into how
they structure the office. Essentially it is a home-away-from-home. The office
is comfortable. Co-workers are treated like family. They dine together. They
have their families up for happy hour (kids included), and generally have a
great time. Once a year they have a company retreat, where they rent a property
in an exotic location and gather as a group.

I will admit that I was reconsidering my staunch **remote only** world view
after hearing them talk about their setup.

The second half of their talk was about competing with the big boys. It is
interesting to consider that **#1 does not have to be the goal**. They are
seeing great success delighting their clients in a space with a lot of
competition. I thought that was cool, and a very good point.

![Patrick McKenzie](/images/bacon/bacon_biz_2013-7.jpg)

If there was any of these talks that had the potential to exponentially pay for
the cost of admission, it was Patrick's. Known in some circles as Patio11,
Patrick built a successful business around **selling printable bingo cards to
teachers**. WTFLOL? In the process he got _really good_ at SEO and online
marketing.

And **charging more**.

![Patrick McKenzie](/images/bacon/bacon_biz_2013-8.jpg)

He gave really good advice on the "funnel" and converting visits into sales. He
reiterated the early advice from Marc about **stomping the shit out of
objections** that potential customers might have.

I'm excited to put his advice into practice.

## Day 2 (Lightening Talks)

![Anthony Eden and Lindsay Nixon](/images/bacon/bacon_biz_2013-9.jpg)

Anthony Eden founded DNSimple while working another job. He attacked a simple
problem and delivered a simple solution and has since seen success and growth.
He now works on DNSimple fulltime.

Lindsay Nixon got sick of lawyering and leveraged the success of traditionally
published cookbooks into subscription vegan meal-plans that are generating tidy
profits. Recurring tidy profits.

![Ben Curtis, Ian Landsman, and Thomas Fuchs](/images/bacon/bacon_biz_2013-10.jpg)

Ben Curtis of Honeybadger strives to make his customers **awesome**. Honesty,
responsiveness, and transparency with your customers will help to ensure that
they continue to be your customers.

Ian Landsman of Snappy leveraged a design firm with popularity on Dribble to get
"2 for 1" on his design work. They encouraged the firm to post "everything" on
Dribbble, which funneled potential clients to their website and resulted in 5000
pre-launch subscribers to their mailing list.

Thomas Fuchs gave an interesting rundown of tracking metrics like money, churn
rate, and lifetime customer value. He pointed out how shitty raw data can be,
and gave some tips on converting that raw data into something usable.

![Matt Brindley & Ryan Delk](/images/bacon/bacon_biz_2013-11.jpg)

Matt Brindley of Litmus told us how they eliminated tension between development
and support by implementing "support Fridays". The result is less confusion and
happier customers.

Ryan Delk from Gumroad broke down some very interesting metrics in regards to
launches across various mediums. The short story? Email converts to $$.

![Chris Savage & Mike Brown](/images/bacon/bacon_biz_2013-12.jpg)

Chris Savage from Wistia gave a convincing talk about using video in meaningful
ways. It made me seriously consider how video can play into a solid marketing
plan, and he had tips about how to deliver quality content that customers will
respond to.

Mike Brown puts on a conference called Webstock in New Zealand. They don't
market the conference, but it sells out and they get world class speakers. If
you ever wanted a deductible way of hitting New Zealand, you should consider
Webstock. I know I am.

![Nick, Garrett, Dave, and Scott](/images/bacon/bacon_biz_2013-13.jpg)

Nick Disabato got into Kickstarter early with his publishing of Cadence & Slang,
a wonderful volume on User Experience and interaction design. He presented it as
how he did "all the wrong things", but as a backer of the project, and a happy
customer, I'd say he did a lot of right things. I'm looking forward to his next
edition of the book.

Garrett Dimon is the founder of Sifter. His talk on **fear** resonated with me.
It is so easy to get completely locked up with fear. I know this personally.
Build something. **Just fucking ship it**.

Dave Martorana is a founder at Flyclops. They make an iOS game called
**Domino!** that has seen some success. He said that diversification would
really help their business. A single app in a single app store is scary.

Scott Watermasysk from Kickoff Labs was the last speaker of the day. He
reiterated the **charge more** mantra as well as pointing out that free services
aren't really competitors. Free is a crutch!

## Conclusion

This was an awesome experience. The conference had a lot of extended breaks for
mingling and getting to know people. The speakers were **all** awesome and open,
as well as highly available. The knowledge that got dropped was outrageously
high quality, and I will keep going back as long as they hold it.

It was also my first time in Philly. Great town!

In the spirit of BaconBiz I've decided to <a
href="https://gum.co/baconbiz2013sketchnotes">high resolution DRM free PDFs of
my notes</a>. Before you ask, I do realize that the entire set is posted above,
but if you'd like your own copy for archive and would like to encourage future
note taking, please take advantage and buy the PDF :>

You might also enjoy: <a href="https://joelhooks.com/blog/2013/06/07/what-i-learned-from-brennan-dunns-consultancy-masterclass-w-slash-sketchnotes/"><strong>What I Learned From Brennan Dunn's Consultancy Masterclass</strong></a>
